Post on how to integrate a build-system in Conan (#80)
conan-io/conan-io.github.io: _posts/2019-07-16-Integrate-build-system-in-Conan.markdown

  prerequisites. We have to modify the *configuration context* (``conf.env``) variable to tell Waf where will
  it be able to find the *includes* and *library* files. Conan has all this information so we will need a tool
  that transforms that information in a way we can load in the *wscript* and that's what a *Conan
  generator* is designed to do.

* ``build`` command will transform the source files into build files. Note that in the call to ``bld.program``
  we can tell Waf which libraries we are linking through the ``use`` argument. The *Conan generator* will have to
  provide this argument to Waf as well.

Waf provides us with the capability of loading *python modules* using the ``load`` command so we could create
some Python code with the *Conan generator* that modifies the Waf *configuration context* to include the
information of the libraries location and one variable with all the list of dependencies as input to the
``use`` argument.

#### Custom Conan generators

A [custom generator](https://docs.conan.io/en/latest/reference/generators/custom.html#custom-generator) in
Conan is a class that extends ``Generator`` and implements two properties:

> * ``filename`` should return the name of the file that will be generated. In our case we will generate a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* ``filename`` should return the name of the file that will be generated. In our case, we will generate a
```

        self._conanfile.run(command)

{% endhighlight %}

We modify the configuration environment through the ``conf.env`` variable setting all the relevant flags for
*Release* and *Debug* configurations depending on if we are building with Visual Studio or any other compiler.
We also define a ``build`` method that runs the Waf build tool.

### Putting it all together

#### Building the library

At this point, we are able to create a recipe that builds our library with the Waf build system. An example of
the structure of the project would be as follows:
 
{% highlight text%}

waf-mylib/
├── src/
│   └── mylib.cpp
├── include/
│   └── mylib.hpp
├── conanfile.py
└── wscript

{% endhighlight %}

With a ``conanfile.py`` that declares the requirement of all the necessary tools for building the project.

{% highlight python %}

waf_import = python_requires("waf-build-helper/0.1@user/channel")

class MyLibConan(ConanFile):
    settings = "os", "compiler", "build_type", "arch"
    name = "mylib-waf"
    version = "1.0"
    license = "MIT"
    author = "Conan Team"
    description = "Just a simple example of using Conan to package a Waf lib"

>     exports = "wscript", "src/mylib.cpp", "include/mylib.hpp", "LICENSE"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    exports = "LICENSE"
    exports_sources = "wscript", "src/mylib.cpp", "include/mylib.hpp"
```

    build_requires = "waf/2.0.18@user/channel"

    def build(self):
        waf = waf_import.WafBuildEnvironment(self)
        waf.configure()
        waf.build()

    def package(self):
        self.copy("*.hpp", dst="include", src="include", keep_path=False)
        self.copy("*.lib", dst="lib", src="build", keep_path=False)
        self.copy("*.dll", dst="bin", keep_path=False)
        self.copy("*.dylib*", dst="lib", src="build", keep_path=False)
        self.copy("*.so", dst="lib", src="build", keep_path=False)
        self.copy("*.a", dst="lib", src="build", keep_path=False)
        self.copy("LICENSE", dst="licenses", src=".", keep_path=False)

    def package_info(self):
        self.cpp_info.libs = ["mylib"]

{% endhighlight %}

The simplest ``wscript`` to build the library could be like this:

{% highlight python %}

top = '.'
out = 'build'

def options(opt):
	opt.load('compiler_cxx')

def configure(conf):
	conf.load('compiler_cxx')
	conf.load('waf_conan_toolchain', tooldir='.')

def build(bld):
	bld.stlib(target='mylib', source='./src/mylib.cpp')

{% endhighlight %}

> The information for the build system is passed through the loading the of the ``waf_conan_toolchain.py`` file

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The information for the build system is passed through the loading of the ``waf_conan_toolchain.py`` file
```

that was created by the build-helper.

#### Consuming the library

If we want to consume the library we have just created using Waf we just have to declare the needed
``build_requires`` and ``python_requires`` in the ``conanfile.py``.

{% highlight python %}

waf_import = python_requires("waf-build-helper/0.1@user/channel")

class TestWafConan(ConanFile):
    settings = "os", "compiler", "build_type", "arch"
    name = "waf-consumer"
    generators = "Waf"
    requires = "mylib-waf/1.0@user/channel"
    build_requires = "WafGen/0.1@user/channel", "waf/2.0.18@user/channel"
    exports_sources = "wscript", "main.cpp"

    def build(self):
        waf = waf_import.WafBuildEnvironment(self)
        waf.configure()
        waf.build()

{% endhighlight %}

And create a ``wscript`` that loads all the Conan information in the Waf environment.

{% highlight python %}

def options(opt):

> 	opt.load('compiler_cxx')

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    opt.load('compiler_cxx')
```

Reviewer: tabs x spaces

def configure(conf):
    conf.load('compiler_cxx')
    conf.load('waf_conan_libs_info', tooldir='.')
    conf.load('waf_conan_toolchain', tooldir='.')

def build(bld):

> 	bld.program(source='main.cpp', target='app', use=bld.env.CONAN_LIBS)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    bld.program(source='main.cpp', target='app', use=bld.env.CONAN_LIBS)
```

Reviewer: ditto

{% endhighlight %}

Now, we could build our application using Conan:

{% highlight text %}

conan source . --source-folder=build
conan install . --install-folder=build

> conan build . --build-folder=build

Reviewer: maybe other magic gif printing all commands?

Author: Maybe something like this ?
![waf_success](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/5045666/61231559-a333ee80-a72c-11e9-802b-dc09ac8e36f8.gif)

Reviewer: Yes! that's it! :heart:

{% endhighlight %}

At this point, you should have a general understanding of what Conan *generators*, *build-helpers* and
*installers* are and how they can help you to integrate almost any build system in Conan. Now you can clone
the [Conan examples repository](https://github.com/conan-io/examples) to see the implementation at a higher

> detail and start integrating your favourite build system in the Conan package manager.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
detail and start integrating your favorite build system in the Conan package manager.
```

---
layout: post
comments: false
title: "Integrate a build system in Conan"
---

> As you will probably know Conan has official support for integration with several build systems such as

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As you will probably know, Conan has official support for integration with several build systems such as
```

[CMake](https://cmake.org/), [MSBuild](https://visualstudio.microsoft.com) or
[Meson](https://mesonbuild.com/) amongst others. But maybe you don't know that if you are using a build system
that is not currently supported, Conan provides the tools to integrate it and build and consume packages that

> use your preferred build system.

Reviewer 2: avoid repetition
```suggestion
use it.
```

The code for this post is now available in the [Conan examples repository](https://github.com/conan-io/examples). 
Feel free to clone it and experiment with the code.

### Where do I start ?

Imagine that you want to create some packages using a specific build system and let others consume your packages and build them in case there are not binaries generated for their configuration. Conan has three features that can help you with that:

* [Conan generators](https://docs.conan.io/en/latest/reference/generators.html). They provide all the

>   information to your build system of which are the dependencies and where are they in a format it will

Reviewer 2: This needs some rephrasing like:

```
They provide your build system with all the information about dependencies in a suitable format
```
```

  understand.
 
* [Conan installer](https://docs.conan.io/en/latest/devtools/create_installer_packages.html). Conan allows you
  to create packages for tools needed in the build process and installing them later with a ``build_requires`` to
  be able to invoke that tool from Conan. In our case, we want to install the tools to run our build system.

* [Conan build-helper](https://docs.conan.io/en/latest/reference/build_helpers.html). Build-helpers assist you
  in the process of translating settings such as ``build_type``, ``compiler.version`` or ``arch`` to the
  build system. It can also invoke the build system tools to build our sources. To use the build helper inside
  a ``conanfile.py`` we will use a [Python
  requires](https://docs.conan.io/en/latest/reference/conanfile/other.html)

### Conan generator for the Waf build system

To test these tools, we have selected the [Waf](https://waf.io/) build system. Waf is a build-automation tool
designed to help in the automatic compilation and installation of computer software. It is open-source
software written in Python and is released under the terms of the [BSD
license](https://waf.io/book/#_customization_and_redistribution).

> Waf is a generic utility for building projects and project-specific details are stored in Python modules under

Reviewer 2: I don't know why this text ins in *italic* format 😕 ❓

the name *wscript*. A Waf project must contain a top-level *wscript* where the commands that will make the
build happen are defined. Also, a *configuration context* will store data which may be re-used during the build.
Let's see how a minimal implementation for that *wscript* would look for a C++ project where we want to build
an executable that depends on ``mylib`` library.

{% highlight python %}

#! /usr/bin/env python
# encoding: utf-8

top = '.'
out = 'build'

def options(opt):
	opt.load('compiler_cxx')

def configure(conf):
	conf.load('compiler_cxx')
	conf.env.INCLUDES_mylib = ['dir_to_mylib_includes']
	conf.env.LIBPATH_mylib = ['dir_to_mylib_libs']
	conf.env.LIB_mylib = 'mylib'

def build(bld):
	bld.program(source='main.cpp', target='app', use='mylib')

{% endhighlight %}

> As you can see, there are several commands defined here being ``configure`` and ``build`` the ones that matter

Reviewer 2: To follow the same style as in the documentation
```suggestion
As you can see, there are several commands defined here being ``configure()`` and ``build()`` the ones that matter
```

most to us at this moment.

> * ``configure`` command has the responsibility to set several settings and find the location of the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* The ``configure`` command has the responsibility to set several settings and find the location of the
```

  prerequisites. We have to modify the *configuration context* (``conf.env``) variable to tell Waf where will
  it be able to find the *includes* and *library* files. Conan has all this information so we will need a tool
  that transforms that information in a way we can load in the *wscript* and that's what a *Conan
  generator* is designed to do.

> * ``build`` command will transform the source files into build files. Note that in the call to ``bld.program``

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* The ``build`` command will transform the source files into build files. Note that in the call to ``bld.program``
```

>   we can tell Waf which libraries we are linking through the ``use`` argument. The *Conan generator* will have to

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  we can tell Waf which libraries we are linking with/using? the ``use`` argument. The *Conan generator* will have to
```

  provide this argument to Waf as well.

> Waf provides us with the capability of loading *python modules* using the ``load`` command so we could create

Reviewer 2: Simplify and make sentences shorter so it is easier to read
```suggestion
Waf can also load *python modules* using the ``load`` command. That way, we could create
```

some Python code with the *Conan generator* that modifies the Waf *configuration context* to include the

> information of the libraries location and one variable with all the list of dependencies as input to the

Reviewer 2: Make this sentence shorter

        conan_libs = []
        for dep_name, info in self.deps_build_info.dependencies:
            if dep_name not in self.conanfile.build_requires:
                dep_name = dep_name.replace("-", "_")
                sections.append("   ctx.env.INCLUDES_{} = {}".format(
                    dep_name, info.include_paths))
                sections.append("   ctx.env.LIBPATH_{} = {}".format(
                    dep_name, info.lib_paths))
                sections.append("   ctx.env.LIB_{} = {}".format(
                    dep_name, self._remove_lib_extension(info.libs)))
                conan_libs.append(dep_name)
        sections.append("   ctx.env.CONAN_LIBS = {}".format(conan_libs))
        sections.append("")
        return "\n".join(sections)

class WafGeneratorPackage(ConanFile):
    name = "WafGen"
    version = "0.1"
    license = "MIT"

{% endhighlight %}

This generator will create the ``waf_conan_libs_info.py`` file with all the dependencies information. We can
pass this information to Waf with the ``load`` command in the *wscript*:

{% highlight python %}
def configure(conf):
	conf.load('compiler_cxx')
	conf.load('waf_conan_libs_info', tooldir='.')
{% endhighlight %}

> But that would only work if we have the Waf build tool in our path and we don't know if our consumers are

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
But that would only work if we have the Waf build tool in our path. However, we don't know if our consumers are
```

Python script from the [Waf repository](https://gitlab.com/ita1024/waf/). We can create a Conan package that
downloads the tool and makes it available to perform our build. This would be the structure of the
``conanfile.py`` for our installer:

{% highlight python %}

class WAFInstallerConan(ConanFile):
    name = "waf"
    version = "2.0.18"
    settings = "os_build"
    homepage = "https://gitlab.com/ita1024/waf"
    license = "BSD"
    exports_sources = ["LICENSE"]

    def build(self):
        source_url = "https://waf.io/waf-%s" % (self.version)
        self.output.warn("Downloading Waf build system: %s" % (source_url))
        tools.download(source_url, "waf")
        if self.settings.os_build == "Windows":
            tools.download(
                "https://gitlab.com/ita1024/waf/raw/waf-{}/utils/waf.bat".format(
                    self.version), "waf.bat")
        elif self.settings.os_build == "Linux" or self.settings.os_build == "Macos":
            self.run("chmod 755 waf")

    def package(self):
        self.copy(pattern="LICENSE", src='.', dst="licenses")
        self.copy('waf', src='.', dst="bin", keep_path=False)

>         if self.settings.os_build == "Windows":

Reviewer 2: Please update this with the changes done in the examples

            self.copy('waf.bat', src='.', dst="bin", keep_path=False)

    def package_info(self):
        self.output.info("Using Waf %s version" % self.version)
        self.env_info.path.append(os.path.join(self.package_folder, "bin"))

{% endhighlight %}

Note that **only** the ``os_build`` setting has been left from the settings of the ``conanfile.py`` because it
does not make sense to create different installer packages depending for example on the ``compiler`` or
``arch`` as the tool will be the same for all those configurations. It will only create different

> packages for differentiating ``os_build`` as the tool is going to be called through a *.bat* file in *Windows*

Reviewer 2: Don't give too many details, the code of the recipe is there so people can check

and in *Linux* the permissions have to be set. After installing this package all consumers that declare it as
``build_requires`` will have this tool available on the path.

At this point, we are able to *tell Waf about the libraries locations* and we *can invoke Waf* from a

> *conanfile* using ``self.run`` and manually passing settings like the ``build_type``. But there is a better

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
*conanfile* using ``self.run()`` and manually passing settings like the ``build_type``. But there is a better
```

way of doing this that will be the missing piece of our puzzle: *creating our own Conan build-helper*.

### Conan build-helper for Waf

Our build-helper will have two missions:

* Generate all the information with the Conan *build settings* to a format Waf can understand. We will generate
  another *Python module* that sets build information that Conan has such as ``arch``,
  ``build_type``, ``compiler`` or ``compiler.runtime`` in Waf. The name of this file will be
  ``waf_conan_toolchain.py``.

* Assist with the compilation of libraries and applications in the ``build()`` method of a recipe. We will
  create a method that invokes the build system abstracting the calls to ``self.run`` in the *conanfile*.

To create our own build-helper, we will use the ``python_requires()`` feature of Conan. That way we will be

> able to reuse python code existing in other ``conanfile.py`` recipes. We will create a package with our

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
able to reuse python code existing in other *conanfile.py* recipes. We will create a package with our
```

build-helper code and reuse it in the consumers importing them as a *Python requires*. There is a minimal
implementation of the *Python requires* in the *conanfile* but all the important code will reside in
``waf_environment.py`` file that contains the ``WafBuildEnvironment`` class. To learn a bit more about *Python
Requires*, please visit the [Conan
documentation](https://docs.conan.io/en/latest/extending/python_requires.html#python-requires).

{% highlight python %}

class PythonRequires(ConanFile):
    name = "waf-build-helper"
    version = "0.1"
    exports = "waf_environment.py"

{% endhighlight %}

As we said, all the important code is in the ``WafBuildEnvironment`` class in ``waf_environment.py``. Let’s
see an example of a simplified build-helper implementation that only takes into account the Conan

> ``build_type`` would be. The configuration of the environment is made calling to the ``configure`` method of

Reviewer 2: Not needed?
```suggestion
``build_type``. The configuration of the environment is made calling to the ``configure()`` method of
```

class TestWafConan(ConanFile):
    settings = "os", "compiler", "build_type", "arch"
    name = "waf-consumer"
    generators = "Waf"
    requires = "mylib-waf/1.0@user/channel"
    build_requires = "WafGen/0.1@user/channel", "waf/2.0.18@user/channel"
    exports_sources = "wscript", "main.cpp"

    def build(self):
        waf = waf_import.WafBuildEnvironment(self)
        waf.configure()
        waf.build()

{% endhighlight %}

And create a ``wscript`` that loads all the Conan information in the Waf environment.

{% highlight python %}

def options(opt):
    opt.load('compiler_cxx')

def configure(conf):
    conf.load('compiler_cxx')
    conf.load('waf_conan_libs_info', tooldir='.')
    conf.load('waf_conan_toolchain', tooldir='.')

def build(bld):
    bld.program(source='main.cpp', target='app', use=bld.env.CONAN_LIBS)

{% endhighlight %}

Now, we could build our application using Conan:

{% highlight text %}

conan source . --source-folder=build
conan install . --install-folder=build
conan build . --build-folder=build

{% endhighlight %}

At this point, you should have a general understanding of what Conan *generators*, *build-helpers* and

> *installers* are and how they can help you to integrate almost any build system in Conan. Now you can clone

Reviewer 2: and additionally about python requires all in the same pack!

---
layout: post
comments: false
title: "Integrate a build system in Conan"
---

As you will probably know Conan has official support for integration with several build systems such as

> [CMake](https://cmake.org/), [Visual Studio](https://visualstudio.microsoft.com) or

Reviewer 3: Visual Studio itself is not a build system, probably you wanted to mention MSBuild
